so we're moving soon and I am so excited
because we gonna be owning our first
home rather like renting here so I'm
actually gonna be able to put stuff on
the walls and hang it on the wall so I'm
gonna get a load more prints in my
office come filming space so if you know
of any really cool companies that do a
lot of science or space themed prints
like let me know in the comments below
so I can make this whole section of wall
like a little shrine to science
okay there is a lot to get through in
this night sky news especially because
July's night sky is a busy one so let's
jump right into this and start by
looking at
[Music]
so first on the 27th just after sunset
if you've got a clear horizon towards
the Sun look out for mercury and Mars
very low on that western horizon they're
gonna be really close to the two stars
in Gemini castor and Pollux that are
really bright to spot as well so just
after sunset you might get a chance of
seeing all of those together in the sky
which should just be a really pretty
sight and on the second of July we've
actually got a solar eclipse
now this one's getting mostly visible
across South America totality is a very
thin strip across sort of Chile and
Argentina a link below where you can
find a map showing the partial and the
total eclipse paths so you can see say
if you're gonna be on holiday down there
or if you live down there what time
things are gonna start there's actually
a huge astronomy observatory in chile up
in the atacama desert where it's very
high and very dry so perfect conditions
for astronomy so there's gonna be a load
of people out there they're gonna be
able to see it at the same time as doing
their observations at nighttime and
they're actually gonna livestream at for
us at the National astronomy meeting in
Lancaster that's taking place all week
and if you haven't heard of Lancaster
it's kind of like the Winterfell of the
UK the North remembers so I'm really
excited for that I'm gonna get to watch
the livestream like with all of my
astronomy mates that are usually just
you know spread up and down the country
for the rest of the year so it'll be a
good way to catch up and also share and
like a really really cool moment if you
are in South America and you want to
actually see the Eclipse for yourself
but you don't have the actual approve
like solar glasses that you can actually
wear to look directly at the Sun please
don't look directly the Sun if you don't
have those special glasses instead what
you can do is get a colander we call it
over here in the UK you know the kind of
metal thing that you use to strain
vegetables anything really with holes in
will work hold it above your head let
the sudden project through it and you'll
see the projection of the Eclipse
however far along it is on the ground in
all of the colander holes which is
pretty cool I always think they
essentially act like a pinhole camera
when you do this moving on though on the
9th of July Saturn is going to go into
opposition
it essentially means that it's the exact
opposite part of the sky from the Sun
it's the point at which the earth is
closest to Saturn so it's getting very
very bright in the sky so make sure you
look out for it it's in the
constellation of Sagittarius so look to
this stylus if you're in the northern
hemisphere and look to the north if
you're in the southern hemisphere and
the closer that you actually equator the
higher in the sky it's going to be in
the easier it'll be to spot you don't
manage to spot it though on the 15th the
moon is gonna come incredibly close to
Saturn so that's gonna make it quite
easy to find this guy because all you've
got to do is find the moon if you're
anywhere in the Pacific Islands I don't
know if there's many of you that watch
me from there but if there are the moon
is actually gonna pass across Saturn for
you it's what we call an occult so
that'll be a really nice moment when you
see Saturn peeking out again from the
edge of the moon when it's finished a
cult in Saturn completely and then
speaking of the moon on the 16th we then
have a partial lunar eclipse as well
this month at least for Australia Asia
Europe and Africa and South America
we're gonna get a chance to see this
essentially North America sorry you're
not gonna get a chance to see this one
it's only a partial lunar eclipse this
one because it's not gonna fully pass
through the Earth's Umbra as we call it
the full solid shadow as opposed to it
penumbra where the moon still will turn
red because you can imagine it's kind of
like a sunset shadow that the light from
the Sun gets refracted through the
atmosphere like at a sunset and it hits
the moon it's actually the last lunar
eclipse that's gonna pass through that
much darker Umbra region of the Earth's
shadow until May 2021 so if you get
chance to see it make sure you do all
right so all of the fun things happening
with the moon aside let's move on to
what's been happening in space news in
June
[Music]
so I want to start off with first just
like a little segment I'm gonna call fun
pictures from the past month because
there's so many of them Betty Colombo it
just ISA spacecraft which is on its way
to mercury due for arrival in 2025 after
a number of flybys just slow it down so
it doesn't just go hurtling into the Sun
has actually taken three selfies this
one essentially with its onboard cameras
just to show to the team that it's solar
panels and then it's antennae are in top
working order but I just love seeing
pictures of spacecraft just hanging
around in what looks like the void of
space I'll never get tired of seeing
them then we've got a really cool
picture of the asteroid Bennu thanks the
NASA's osiris-rex mission which is its
mission to return a sample of asteroid
back to earth is very complimentary to
Jax's Hayabusa to Mission that was the
one that like fired the bullet into the
surface a couple of months ago as well
as iris Rex is still in orbit around
been you so it got there back at the end
of December and it switched up its orbit
this month it's only orbiting about
point four miles from the surface which
is about 700 meters or so so it's broken
the record for the closest orbit to an
object before but it means that the
images it's sending that are so
incredible they're so detailed and I
love the one that came out this month
that one of the team members tweeted
about it was just saying like look at
this Boulder just like stick it up like
no big deal like that was that was a
tweet that was straight to my heart then
there was the image sent back by the
Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter of the sand
dune on Mars that looks like the Star
Trek logo which is completely by random
chance random chance seems to have
operated in our favor
you know that's they're shaped by wind
and lava flows on Mars but I've never
seen anything so perfect and so
beautiful in my entire life so moving on
now to Jupiter's moon Europa there was a
paper that came out this month by Trumbo
Brown and hand that was talking about
sodium chloride ie salts on Europa which
doesn't sound not exciting like normal
table salt but Europa actually is really
interesting it really intrigued
astronomers for a long time because it
hasn't
see crust around it which we think
there's subsurface oceans below
so essentially what they're saying is
that it found salty oceans just like we
have on earth which is really
interesting because if it has any form
of volcanic activity like the earth does
as well you could have things like
geothermal vents on the sea floor where
you providing heat to a salty ocean of
water where you could actually be
harboring more life so its previously
thought that you rope his oceans and the
icy crust could actually be dominated by
sulfates so just compounds containing
sulfur which could actually affect the
habitability of Europa but what these
recent observations have found when they
actually tried to probe the surface of
Europa further using the Hubble Space
Telescope is that when you take a
spectrum of the reflective light there's
evidence that there's sodium chloride on
the surface which has been absorbing a
very specific wavelength of light from
the Sun so that when we split the light
from it we see this really clear dip in
the light of that specific wavelength
they were then able to take one of those
absorption spectra x' all over the
surface of Europa as it rotated and so
we're ended up with a map of where all
of these sodium chloride are used salt
deposits were on the surface and they've
shown that it's not actually even
amongst the whole surface there's one
area that has a very high concentration
of salt compares the others so they can
then compare that map of where all the
sodium chloride ie salt is with a map of
the terrain of the surface of Europa and
they find that actually the sodium
chloride is found in most highest
concentration where that terrain is
really rough and been very very
disrupted so the authors of this paper
have come up with this hypothesis that
says well if there is active volcanism
on Europa that could be driving song
form of eruption of the ocean to the
surface and through the crust then that
would disrupt the terrain it would
deposit a load of salty water down where
you'd see a lot more sodium chloride
absorption when you observed it and that
could explain what had been seen but
that would obviously mean that Europa
had salty ocean
just like the earth does life finds away
so another paper that came out this
month by liska and collaborators solved
a mystery of how black holes a creep
material so if you imagine a black hole
just sat there happily in space and you
have a big clump of gas the hydrogen gas
that comes towards it that's gonna get
eaten by the black hole essentially what
happens is that that material wants to
orbit the black hole so what once was a
blob actually gets pulled down into a
really thin disc which we call an
accretion disk around the black hole and
the reason for that is because that
material has been set spinning because
it's orbiting around the black hole so
just like when you take a lump of pizza
dough and you set it spinning above your
head it flattens out into discs the same
thing happens to the material around the
black hole now the angle that that disc
is that will depend on which angle the
material came in at as well but the
thing is the black hole will also be
spinning and that's because in eating
material that came in with this
rotational energy that we call angular
momentum and that has to be conserved so
what happens if the accretion disk that
comes in at the angle of the new
material isn't aligned with the
direction that the black hole is
spinning what happens really close to
the black hole where stuff is actually
falling in past the event horizon and so
what no one really knew what actually
happened really close into the black
hole it turns out it's all to do with
magnetic fields which it is a very long
running joke in astrophysics that we all
don't think about magnetic fields
because it's very very complicated but
it turns out they're the solution to
many of astrophysics is problems so it's
paper actually finally managed to
simulate this using something called
general relativistic magneto
hydrodynamics ie using general activity
to describe gravity and putting in some
magnetic fields to see how the fluid of
particles around the black hole behaves
and it turns out that essentially yeah
what happens is that the accretion disk
close into the black hole does warp
slightly to bring it the same angle at
which the black hole is rotating so that
it can be
accreted and it's the interaction of the
magnetic field that the black hole
creates that is obviously also spinning
and tangling up all those magnetic field
lines as well that causes that this
weird instability in the disk it
disrupts it and so that it can then snap
to orbiting around the black hole in the
direction the black hole is spinning
there was also two more EXO Earth's
announced this month as well in their
habitable zone around something called
tiga and star which was a really
interesting result but I feel like in
the minute there's always new
announcements of exoplanets that have
been discovered that become the most
earth-like planet as well so I'm not
gonna go into massive amounts of detail
on that because what I want to talk
about is SpaceX and their Starling
satellites that they have put up in the
past month they launched about 60
satellites back on May 23rd as part of
their star link fleet that will
eventually be 12,000 satellites that
will be interconnected in order to
provide Internet wherever you are in the
world to the most disadvantaged and
economically challenged people and as
cool as that is people are worried so
when they first launch they were all put
into very similar orbits and all of a
sudden all of these images and videos
popped up online of these satellites
essentially going across the sky in a
train and they were incredibly bright
because they were so very close to the
Earth's surface so a huge reflecting
area for light from the Sun so that we
could see them in the night sky and
people were very worried that if this
was only 60 satellites then what were
12,000 gonna look like in the sky
thankfully those 60 satellites have now
spread out in their orbits they'd also
actually increase their altitude so that
they're orbiting much higher around the
Earth so we don't see them as easily
from their reflected sunlight but that
was not before Elon Musk massively
embarrassed himself on Twitter by saying
that the satellites would be in darkness
when the stars are visible I think
everyone has probably seen a satellite
in the sky at some point maybe even the
International Space Station everything
much higher off the ground and so
they're actually able to still be lit up
by the Sun even when they're on the
nighttime side of the earth it's why we
can even see them in the first place so
those 60 satellites have now blended
with the 4000 dodge other satellites
that are currently in orbit around Earth
but then Alex Parker on astronomer on
Twitter he then made this visualization
of what if you took 12,000 satellites
and put them into orbit on random orbits
in the sky what would you actually see
in a general night's observing and you
found that you would actually see about
a hundred an hour as fast moving dots on
the sky which is a huge issue firstly
because it changes the entire landscape
of the night sky for every single person
on earth and they don't get a choice
about that either there is literally not
a single person who won't have the night
sky affected by this fleet of satellite
being launched by one single company and
it said that there's nothing legally
anyone can do about that either to
challenge it the second thing is that
professional astronomy will be massively
affected by this satellites are
literally the bane of an astronomers
life because they fly through your field
I mean this big streak of light on your
really nice long exposure of a really
faint galaxy or if you're a radio
astronomer interference from them can
cause huge big blips in your data as
well and we already have to contend with
the 4,000 or so odd that are already up
there and it's manageable but if there's
12,000 of them with a hundred or so
visible an hour
I sometimes observe a single faint
galaxy in the sky for over four hours at
a time just staring with the telescope
at that one source and you telling me
that I've got a hundred or so fast
moving dots an hour to contend with that
could somehow streak across my four
hours worth of exposure time that is a
lot to deal with it's also gonna
massively effective field of transients
in astronomy as well so this is anything
that changes on the sky night after
night so I'm talking about if supernovae
go off or if there's a lensing event
that will brighten a background object
or if there's like a gamma-ray burst or
something like that that has another
optical counterpart
then how is that going to be affected by
the fact you've got a hundred dots
moving around the sky every hour and 20
perspective the new telescope we're
building to do just that called the
large synoptic survey telescope has
already been estimated that it's gonna
give over a million alerts a night for
stuff that's changed in the sky so
adding other 12,000 satellites to that
to dig through the data is gonna be a
nightmare
now Elon Musk says oh well most
astronomical observatories are all
moving to space because it's better
anyway and yeah it is better
somebody's gonna fund those though like
jteem UST that James Webb Space
Telescope was gonna replace Hubble has
taken billions of dollars to fund and
it's been delayed constantly in
constantly and we're still waiting for
that to go up and there's a lot of old
observatories that are currently being
shut down Hubble will probably die soon
the Spitzer Space Telescope is being
taken out of service in January Kepler's
we've just lost as well so we're losing
more than we're funding first of all and
also the things on the ground are still
gonna be the basis of astronomy that's
done just because yeah it's cheaper and
there's more chances of doing
observations from the ground as well
they are so oversubscribed both
ground-based and space-based telescopes
already I mean as Elon Musk gonna pay
for all of these new space telescopes
because the current ones are dropping
like flies as if the pressure on James
Webb Space Telescope wasn't great enough
as it is it's somehow just got higher
okay so that I guess that was a pretty
serious note to end on sorry guys maybe
we should just do something really silly
now to just sort of lighten the mood a
little bit like it's alright I got it
out of my system we're all good now as I
said I'm gonna be going to the
Nationalists trying to be meeting in
Lancaster next week so I should have a
load of updates for you on my YouTube
stories and on my Instagram stories and
Twitter as well so make sure you're
following me on social media those are
my handles up in the top corner but
until next time wherever you are in the
world I wish you clear skies free of
pesky satellites
oh I don't forget to let me know about
the prints for the wall in the comments
Oh hanging today that's it friends 13th
birthday last night and just like well
so close back aches he was with the
people who were the people what were
their names who were the people can
smell toast from downstairs again I did
not write down the name how are we human
or are we bang
[Music]